Lecture 1: Introduction to Information Security

Eleftheria Makri| Security

04/02/2026

Bij ons leer je de wereld kennen

Today's agenda
∑ Organizational details
∑ How to succeed in learning and passing the course
∑ Topic today: Introduction to Information Security
∑ What is security? ∑ Security trade-offs
∑ Plan of the course

Organizational details

∑ Lecturers:
∑ Eleftheria Makri ∑ Francesco Bariatti
∑ TA Team:
∑ Anna ∑ Cesar ∑ Daan ∑ Dheeraj ∑ Jayme ∑ Laith ∑ Nicolas ∑ Teun

Contact the lecturer <e.makri@liacs.leidenuniv.nl> regarding course organization
(deadline extension requests, questions about lecture material, readings, etc.)
Email to contact about assignment questions and issues: <security2026@liacs.leidenuniv.nl>

Literature and Readings
∑ Recommended but not required textbook:
∑ P. van Oorschot "Computer Security and the Internet. Tools and Jewels" Springer, 2021 [2020 is also fine]. PDF is available at the author's webpage.
∑ Textbook is intended as support material; not as required reading.
∑ Other additional readings will be provided per lecture.
∑ Lecture slides and some material will be provided on Brightspace.
Universiteit Leiden. Bij ons leer je de wereld kennen

Course Structure & Success Criteria
∑ Lectures (x14) - learning theory of security ∑ In-person; no video recordings or online streaming
∑ Practicals (x13) - working on practical assignments ∑ In the Gorlaeus Building on Wednesdays 11.00 ≠ 12.45 (in principle; for exceptions see timetable)
∑ Average of 3 assignments --> Assignment grade ∑ Written exam --> Exam grade ∑ Final grade = 55% Exam grade + 45% Assignment grade
∑ Both the final exam grade and the average grade of the 3 assignments must be at least 5.5 ∑ Assignments are re-takeable towards the end of the semester, but we STRONGLY advice avoiding them (by passing the first chance),
as the retakes are significantly more challenging than the first batch of exercises.
∑ Exam resit is allowed

Assignments
∑ Release dates and deadlines:
∑ Ass. 1 - February 18 ≠ March 12: Bruteforcing
∑ Ass. 2 - March 11 ≠ April 16: Scenario-based vulnerability tracing (option 1)
∑ Ass. 2 - March 11 ≠ April 16: Application security (option 2)
∑ Ass. 3 - April 15 ≠ May 14: Web security
∑ Retake - May 14 ≠ May 28: Retake assignments (any)
∑ Use the practicals to work on assignments. TAs are there to help you.
∑ For all assignments submit a report and all requested supplementary material via ANS. You may work in groups of 2 students
(recommended), or individually on each of the assignments. You may change your group for each assignment.
∑ Deadline extensions will be granted by the lecturer strictly individually and in special circumstances, and only if requested at least 2
days prior to the deadline.
∑ Late submissions will be penalized as follows:
Minus 1 point (on the 10-point scale) for each 24 hours of delay, starting from 5 minutes. Submitting 10 min late: -1 point; submitting 25 hours late: -2 points, etc.

Assignments

Bruteforcing (Feb 18 ≠ Mar 12)

"Hacker" track
AppSec (Mar 11 ≠ Apr 16)

"Manager" track
Scenario-based vulnerability tracing (Mar 11 ≠ Apr 16)

WebSec (Apr 17 ≠ May 14)

∑Your assignments will
focus on hard skills and soft skills.
∑ Reporting is an important
task in any cyber security career path.
∑ Security tasks are not well-
defined by nature (hence creativeness).
https://www.varonis.com/blog/ working-in-cybersecurity/

Plagiarism
∑ Assignments are in individual or groups of 2. ∑ Do discuss and help each other on the course content. ∑ Do not share (partial) solutions to assignments outside your group. ∑ Acknowledge all your sources.
∑ Copying (parts of) solutions, from another group or from any other source is plagiarism. ∑ We will report all plagiarism cases to the Board of Examiners. ∑ Both who copied and who shared their solution will face consequences.

Why Learning Security?

Information Security ≠ 2023 Breaches

Information Security ≠ 2023 Breaches

Information Security ≠ 2023 Breaches

Information Security ≠ 2023 Breaches

Information Security ≠ 2023 Breaches

Major Security Breaches of 2025

Computer Security (COMPUSEC)

Information Systems Security (INFOSEC)

Information Security

Security Principles
INTEGRITY

Additional Security Properties
(including the AAAA properties)

Authenticity

Authorization

Accuracy

Accountability

Non-Repudiation

Attack Types
∑ Attacks are instances when a security requirement is violated.

Attack/Threat Spoofing Tampering Repudiation Information disclosure Denial of service Elevation of privilege

Security requirement Authenticity Integrity Non-repudiation Confidentiality Availability Authorization

Security Controls/Countermeasures

Physical

Logical/ Administrative/

Technical

Policies

Preventive (+deterrence)

Detective

Corrective/ Responsive

Controls

Physical

Logical/ Administrative/

Technical

Policies

Preventive (+deterrence)

Security guard

Firewall

Employee screening policy

Detective

Security camera

Intrusion detection system

Policy to review transaction logs

Corrective/ Responsive

Fire sprinklers

Backup servers

Law enforcement liaison

Security is Asset Protection

Asset

Vulnerability

Trust

Security is Hard!

Why is Security hard?
∑ Consider all potential attacks ∑ Complex, multi-level, expensive mechanisms ∑ Security is often an afterthought ∑ Could be counterintuitive and not user-friendly ∑ Requires monitoring and capabilities to respond ∑ Benefits are evident best after a failure
Security is a process, not a target

Security in context
∑ Security is needed to prevent and counteract the unwanted consequences
∑ but security is not needed for its own sake ∑ this leads to trade-offs or security dilemmas

Security Dilemma 1
Security unaware users want security but have no security expertise.

Trade-off 2
Security hinders ease of use, but if security mechanism is too difficult the users will find a way around it.

Trade-off 3
Security always has a cost, but offers no direct gain, only prevention and reduction of loss.

Trade-off 4
Sometimes failure could cost less than prevention.

Security Dilemma 5
Theory might say that an algorithm is secure, but its implementation will fail. and Practical security measures are often imperfect from the theoretical perspective.

Security Dilemma 6
More security increases system complexity, what increases the attack surface.

So, what about those security jobs?

Jobs in Security

∑ We cannot study it all in one
course, but we will try to focus on some key elements.
∑ You will be equipped to
continue on any career path in security.
https://techshielder.com/the-best-cities-for-acybersecurity-job

Course Content
∑ Security management: ∑ Threat modelling ∑ Security risk management
∑ System and application security: ∑ Vulnerabilities ∑ Secure software/Application Security ∑ Malware analysis ∑ Web security ∑ Network security
∑ Fundamentals: ∑ Access control and identity management ∑ Cryptography

Disclaimer:
This is a provisional plan and may be subject to changes

Questions?
Bij ons leer je de wereld kennen

